Migrate blog content to docs (#2477)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/using-diffusers/write_own_pipeline.mdx

<!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Understanding models and schedulers

> [[open-in-colab]]

Reviewer: Where is the automatically generated colab for this one?

Reviewer 2: I guess the action is run after the PR is merged. The notebooks are created here: https://github.com/huggingface/notebooks

Here's an example of an automatically generated notebook: https://github.com/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/transformers_doc/en/video_classification.ipynb

Example GitHub Action: https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/actions/runs/1564783799

Reviewer 3: Do we have such tooling in place?

Reviewer 2: I think we just need to add this workflow https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/actions/runs/1564783799/workflow. Maybe @stevhliu would know better.

Author: As far as I know, the automatically generated notebook should be created after merging ([this](https://github.com/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers_doc/en/pytorch/write_own_pipeline.ipynb) is where it should be once merged)!

> 🧨 Diffusers allows you to freely exchange models and schedulers in the pipeline to create your own custom pipeline for inference. This guide will show you how to create a custom Stable Diffusion pipeline for inference with the [`LMSDiscreteScheduler`] instead of the default [`PNDMScheduler`].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
🧨 Diffusers allows you to freely exchange models and schedulers in the pipeline to create your own custom pipeline for inference. This guide will show you the components that make up the Stable Diffusion pipeline so you can learn how to combine them for other tasks.
```

## Load pipeline components

> The pretrained [`stable-diffusion-v1-4`](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/tree/main) checkpoint includes all the components required to setup a complete diffusion pipeline. These components are stored in the following folders:

Reviewer 3: Maybe upgrade to `runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5`? Or `stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-base`?

<Tip>

💡 While you can load the entire checkpoint and all its components by calling the [`StableDiffusionPipeline`] with the [`~DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`] method, the goal of this guide is to show how you can pick and choose the individual models and scheduler you want to use to create a custom inference system.

</Tip>

```py
>>> from PIL import Image
>>> import torch
>>> from transformers import CLIPTextModel, CLIPTokenizer
>>> from diffusers import AutoencoderKL, UNet2DConditionModel, PNDMScheduler
# 1. Load the autoencoder model which will be used to decode the latents into image space.

>>> vae = AutoencoderKL.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", subfolder="vae")
# 2. Load the tokenizer and text encoder to tokenize and encode the text.

>>> tokenizer = CLIPTokenizer.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-large-patch14")
>>> text_encoder = CLIPTextModel.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-large-patch14")
# 3. The UNet model for generating the latents.

>>> unet = UNet2DConditionModel.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", subfolder="unet")
```

> Instead of loading the default [`PNDMScheduler`], load the [`LMSDiscreteScheduler`] and feel free to configure some of the parameters:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instead of loading the default [`PNDMScheduler`], we load the [`LMSDiscreteScheduler`] to show how to plug pieces together:
```

```py
>>> from diffusers import LMSDiscreteScheduler

>>> scheduler = LMSDiscreteScheduler(
...     beta_start=0.00085, beta_end=0.012, beta_schedule="scaled_linear", num_train_timesteps=1000
... )
```

Move the models to a GPU to speed up inference:

```py
>>> torch_device = "cuda"
>>> vae.to(torch_device)
>>> text_encoder.to(torch_device)
>>> unet.to(torch_device)

> ```

Reviewer 3: Maybe add:

> The scheduler is not a PyTorch model, so we don't have to move it to the GPU.

an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Understanding pipelines, models and schedulers

[[open-in-colab]]

🧨 Diffusers is designed to be a user-friendly and flexible toolbox for building diffusion systems tailored to your use-case. At the core of the toolbox are models and schedulers. While the [`DiffusionPipeline`] bundles these components together for convenience, you can also unbundle the pipeline and use the models and schedulers separately to create new diffusion systems. 

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to use models and schedulers to assemble a diffusion system for inference, starting with a basic pipeline and then progressing to the Stable Diffusion pipeline.

## Deconstruct a basic pipeline

A pipeline is a quick and easy way to run a model for inference, requiring no more than four lines of code to generate an image:

```py
>>> from diffusers import DDPMPipeline

>>> ddpm = DDPMPipeline.from_pretrained("google/ddpm-cat-256").to("cuda")
>>> image = ddpm(num_inference_steps=25).images[0]
>>> image

> ```

Reviewer: should we show the image here?

That was super easy, but how did the pipeline do that? Let's breakdown the pipeline and take a look at what's happening under the hood.

In the example above, the pipeline contains a UNet model and a DDPM scheduler. The pipeline denoises an image by taking random noise the size of the desired output and passing it through the model several times. At each timestep, the model predicts the *noise residual* and the scheduler uses it to predict a less noisy image. The pipeline repeats this process until it reaches the end of the specified number of inference steps. 

To recreate the pipeline with the model and scheduler separately, let's write our own denoising process.

1. Load the model and scheduler:

    ```py
    >>> from diffusers import DDPMScheduler, UNet2DModel

    >>> scheduler = DDPMScheduler.from_pretrained("google/ddpm-cat-256")
    >>> model = UNet2DModel.from_pretrained("google/ddpm-cat-256").to("cuda")
    ```

2. Set the number of timesteps to run the denoising process for:

    ```py
    >>> scheduler.set_timesteps(50)
    ```

> 

Reviewer: Can we squueze in a new point 3.) here that shows the reader how calling `set_timesteps(50)` has created the `scheduler.timesteps` tensor and what it contains? This would be pretty important to understand IMO.

E..g something like:

```suggestion
3. Having set the number of timesteps, the scheduler has now created a timesteps array we should run over for the denoising process:

```py
>>> sceduler.timesteps
>>> # [999, ...., ....]
```

As one can see this array contains 50 elements spaced evenly from 1000 to 0. The elements correspond to the timesteps at which the model will denoise the image at.

3. Create some random noise with the same shape as the desired output:

    ```py
    >>> import torch

    >>> sample_size = model.config.sample_size
    >>> noise = torch.randn((1, 3, sample_size, sample_size)).to("cuda")
    ```

> 4. Now write a loop to iterate over the number of timesteps. At each timestep, the model does a [~`UNet2DModel.forward`] pass and returns the noisy residual. The scheduler's [`~DDPMScheduler.step`] method takes the noisy residual, timestep, and input and it predicts the image at the previous timestep. This output becomes the next input to the model in the denoising loop, and it'll repeat until it reaches the end of the `set_timesteps`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Now write a loop to iterate over the timesteps. At each timestep, the model does a [~`UNet2DModel.forward`] pass and returns the noisy residual. The scheduler's [`~DDPMScheduler.step`] method takes the noisy residual, timestep, and input and it predicts the image at the previous timestep. This output becomes the next input to the model in the denoising loop, and it'll repeat until it reaches the end of the `timesteps` array.
```

    ```py
    >>> input = noise

    >>> for t in scheduler.timesteps:
    ...     with torch.no_grad():
    ...         noisy_residual = model(input, t).sample
    >>> previous_noisy_sample = scheduler.step(noisy_residual, t, input).prev_sample
    >>> input = previous_noisy_sample
    ```

    This is the entire denoising process, and you can use this same pattern to write any diffusion system.

5. The last step is to convert the denoised output into an image:

    ```py
    >>> from PIL import Image
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> image = (input / 2 + 0.5).clamp(0, 1)
    >>> image = image.cpu().permute(0, 2, 3, 1).numpy()[0]
    >>> image = Image.fromarray((image * 255)).round().astype("uint8")
    >>> image
    ```

> In the next section, you'll put your skills to the test and breakdown the more complex Stable Diffusion pipeline, but it's still built from the same components and follows the same denoising pattern.

Reviewer: Nice! I'd maybe only add 3, 4 sentences to the relationship between `set_timesteps` and `timesteps` to make it crystal clear

As you can see, this is already more complex than the DDPM pipeline which only contains a UNet model. The Stable Diffusion model has three separate pretrained models.

<Tip>

💡 Read the [How does Stable Diffusion work?](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion#how-does-stable-diffusion-work) blog for more details about how the VAE, UNet, and text encoder models.

</Tip>

Now that you know what you need for the Stable Diffusion pipeline, load all these components with the [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] method. You can find them in the pretrained [`runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5`](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) checkpoint, and each component is stored in a separate subfolder:

```py
>>> from PIL import Image
>>> import torch
>>> from transformers import CLIPTextModel, CLIPTokenizer
>>> from diffusers import AutoencoderKL, UNet2DConditionModel, PNDMScheduler

>>> vae = AutoencoderKL.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", subfolder="vae")

> >>> tokenizer = CLIPTokenizer.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-large-patch14")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> tokenizer = CLIPTokenizer.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", subfolder="tokenizer")
```

> >>> text_encoder = CLIPTextModel.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-large-patch14")

Reviewer: The user shouldn't have to know which clip was used for SD1-4

>>> unet = UNet2DConditionModel.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", subfolder="unet")
```

> Instead of the default [`PNDMScheduler`], exchange it for the [`LMSDiscreteScheduler`] to see how easy it is to plug a different scheduler in:

Reviewer: LMS is very outdated, let's maybe use UniPCScheduler instead

> Instead of the default [`PNDMScheduler`], exchange it for the [`LMSDiscreteScheduler`] to see how easy it is to plug a different scheduler in:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of the default [`PNDMScheduler`], exchange it for the [`UniPCMultistepScheduler`] to see how easy it is to plug a different scheduler in:
```

```py

> >>> from diffusers import LMSDiscreteScheduler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> from diffusers import UniPCMultistepScheduler
```

> >>> scheduler = LMSDiscreteScheduler(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> scheduler = UniPCMultistepScheduler.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", subfolder="scheduler")
```

...     beta_start=0.00085, beta_end=0.012, beta_schedule="scaled_linear", num_train_timesteps=1000
... )
```

To speed up inference, move the models to a GPU since, unlike the scheduler, they have trainable weights:

```py
>>> torch_device = "cuda"
>>> vae.to(torch_device)
>>> text_encoder.to(torch_device)
>>> unet.to(torch_device)
```

### Create text embeddings

The next step is to tokenize the text to generate embeddings. The text is used to condition the UNet model and steer the diffusion process towards something that resembles the input prompt. 

<Tip>

💡 The `guidance_scale` parameter determines how much weight should be given to the prompt when generating an image.

</Tip>

Feel free to choose any prompt you like if you want to generate something else!

```py
>>> prompt = ["a photograph of an astronaut riding a horse"]
>>> height = 512  # default height of Stable Diffusion
>>> width = 512  # default width of Stable Diffusion

> >>> num_inference_steps = 100  # Number of denoising steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> num_inference_steps = 30  # Number of denoising steps
```

>>> guidance_scale = 7.5  # Scale for classifier-free guidance
>>> generator = torch.manual_seed(0)  # Seed generator to create the inital latent noise
>>> batch_size = len(prompt)
```

Tokenize the text and generate the embeddings from the prompt:

```py
>>> text_input = tokenizer(
...     prompt, padding="max_length", max_length=tokenizer.model_max_length, truncation=True, return_tensors="pt"
... )

> >>> text_embeddings = text_encoder(text_input.input_ids.to(torch_device))[0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> with torch.no_grad():
>>>     text_embeddings = text_encoder(text_input.input_ids.to(torch_device))[0]
```

```

You'll also need to generate the *unconditional text embeddings* which are the embeddings for the padding token. These need to have the same shape (`batch_size` and `seq_length`) as the conditional `text_embeddings`:

```py
>>> max_length = text_input.input_ids.shape[-1]
>>> uncond_input = tokenizer([""] * batch_size, padding="max_length", max_length=max_length, return_tensors="pt")
>>> uncond_embeddings = text_encoder(uncond_input.input_ids.to(torch_device))[0]
```

> For unconditional image generation, you typically do two forward passes, one for each of the embeddings. But in practice, it is better to concatenate the embeddings into a single batch to avoid doing two forward passes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's batch the conditional and unconditional embeddings into a batch to avoid doing two forward passes:
```

```py
>>> text_embeddings = torch.cat([uncond_embeddings, text_embeddings])
```

### Create random noise

Next, generate some initial random noise as a starting point for the diffusion process. This is the latent representation of the image, and it'll be gradually denoised. At this point, the `latent` image is smaller than the final image size but that's okay though because the model will transform it into the final 512x512 image dimensions later.

```py
>>> latents = torch.randn(
...     (batch_size, unet.in_channels, height // 8, width // 8),
...     generator=generator,

> ... )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
... )
>>> # we divide by 8 since the vae model has 3 down-sampling layers
>>> # 2 ** (len(vae.config.block_out_channels) - 1) == 8
```

>>> latents = latents.to(torch_device)
```

### Denoise the image

> Start by scaling the input with the initial noise distribution, *sigma*, the noise scale value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by scaling the input with the initial noise distribution, *sigma*, the noise scale value which is required for 
improved schedulers, such as [`UniPCMultistepScheduler`] as noted in ["Elucidating the Design Space of Diffusion-Based Generative Models"](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.00364).
```

```py

> >>> scheduler.set_timesteps(num_inference_steps)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>>> latents = latents * scheduler.init_noise_sigma

> ```

Reviewer: Next, we can set the number of timesteps:

```py
>>> scheduler.set_timesteps(num_inference_steps)
```

specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Understanding models and schedulers

[[open-in-colab]]

> A diffusion model consists of two main components, the model and the scheduler. The model's primary function is to denoise noisy input samples. The scheduler handles all the details of the denoising process, such as the number of denoising steps and the amount of noise to add. Depending on the context, the scheduler does slightly different things:

Reviewer 3: This can be a bit confusing as the "model" contains other models. We refer to them later as both "components" and "models". Not sure if attempting to clarify helps.

```suggestion
A diffusion model consists of two main components, the model itself and the scheduler. This is a very high-level conceptual view, as the model contains several components that are themselves pre-trained ML models, as we'll see later. From this view, the model's primary function is to denoise noisy input samples. The scheduler handles all the details of the denoising process, such as the number of denoising steps and the amount of noise to add. Depending on the context, the scheduler does slightly different things:
```

## Load models and scheduler

The pretrained [`runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5`](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) checkpoint includes all the necessary components of a diffusion model, and they're stored in the following folders:

* `text_encoder`: the model used to generate the text embeddings from the input.
* `tokenizer`: the tokenizer used to tokenize the text prompt; it must match the one used by the `text_encoder` model.
* `scheduler`: the scheduling algorithm used to generate a denoised image.
* `unet`: the model used to generate the latent representation of the input. A UNet model has ResNet blocks in its encoder and decoder. The encoder compresses an image representation into a lower resolution image, and the decoder decodes it back to the original higher resolution image with less noise. 
* `vae`: the autoencoder module you'll use to decode latent representations into real images. For inference, you'll only need the VAE decoder to convert the denoised latents back into images.

Load these components individually with the [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained.subfolder`] parameter in the [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] method:

<Tip>

> 💡 Read the [How does Stable Diffusion work?](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion#how-does-stable-diffusion-work) blog for more information about the UNet and VAE models work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
💡 Read the [How does Stable Diffusion work?](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion#how-does-stable-diffusion-work) blog for more information about how the UNet and VAE models work.
```

... )
```

> To speed up inference, move the models to a GPU since they have trainable weights, unlike the scheduler:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To speed up inference, move the models to a GPU since, unlike the scheduler, they have trainable weights:
```
